[DOCS][101] Create Elasticsearch basics section, refactor quickstarts section (#112436)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/intro.asciidoc

[[elasticsearch-intro]]

> == Getting started with Elasticsearch
> ++++
> <titleabbrev>Getting started</titleabbrev>
> ++++

Author: ```suggestion
== {es} basics
```

[[elasticsearch-intro]]
== {es} basics

> This guide covers the essential basics for getting started with {es}.

Author: 💯

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Author: FYI the new "quickstarts" section is all about running code, and not setting up local dev as they are now separate concerns

We chatted about how we want to get a better title for that "quickstarts" section too

modulo that, everything in this PR can be reworded more gooder

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Author: I'll take suggestion 1 for the moment

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Author: will go with "If you'd prefer to start working with {es} right away, then jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>> for hands-on code examples."

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Reviewer: where did the local dev go?

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Author: right, there's a prerequisites section in quickstarts overview that links to local dev and deployment options, but could spell it out here too 👍

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Author: `If you'd prefer to start working with {es} right away, set up a <<run-elasticsearch-locally,local dev environment>> and jump to our <<quickstart,hands-on code examples>> .`

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Reviewer 2: I find it a bit odd that throughout the docs, we say "our" examples, "our" tutorials... "we" shouldn't pull focus in things that aren't really about Elastic. 🙂  I'd just say "some" instead of "our"

> If you'd prefer to get started with code examples, jump to our <<quickstart,quickstarts>>.

Author: I'll do my part and remove "our" usages in this PR 🫡

This guide covers:

* <<elasticsearch-intro-what-is-es>>: Learn about {es} and some of its main use cases.
* <<elasticsearch-intro-deploy>>: Understand your options for deploying {es} in different environments, including a fast local dev setup.
* <<documents-indices>>: Understand {es}'s most important primitives and how it stores data.
* <<es-ingestion-overview>>: Understand your options for ingesting data into {es}.
* <<search-analyze>>: Understand your options for searching and analyzing data in {es}.

> * <<scalability>>: Learn the essentials about moving your {es} deployment to production.

Author: ```suggestion
* <<scalability>>: Understand the basic concepts required for moving your {es} deployment to production.
```

> * <<scalability>>: Learn the essentials about moving your {es} deployment to production.

Author: 👍 revised wording

[[elasticsearch-intro-what-is-es]]
=== What is {es}?

{es-repo}[{es}] is a distributed search and analytics engine, scalable data store, and vector database built on Apache Lucene.
It's optimized for speed and relevance on production-scale workloads.
Use {es} to search, index, store, and analyze data of all shapes and sizes in near real time.

{es} is the heart of the {estc-welcome-current}/stack-components.html[Elastic Stack]. 
Combined with https://www.elastic.co/kibana[{kib}] it powers the following Elastic solutions:

* https://www.elastic.co/enterprise-search[Search]
* https://www.elastic.co/observability[Observability]
* https://www.elastic.co/security[Security]

[TIP]
====
{es} has a lot of features. Explore the full list on the https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/features[product webpage^].
====

[discrete]
[[elasticsearch-intro-use-cases]]
==== Use cases

{es} is used for a wide and growing range of use cases. Here are a few examples:

> **Observability**

Author: >  I know you are trying to be light on links here.

would definitely like to have more links here tho eventually just need to loop in the right folks

[discrete]
[[elasticsearch-intro-use-cases]]
==== Use cases

{es} is used for a wide and growing range of use cases. Here are a few examples:

**Observability**

* *Logs, metrics, and traces*: Collect, store, and analyze logs, metrics, and traces from applications, systems, and services.
* *Application performance monitoring (APM)*: Monitor and analyze application performance data.
* *Real user monitoring (RUM)*: Monitor, quantify, and analyze user interactions with web applications.
* *OpenTelemetry*: Elastic has full native support for OpenTelemetry data.

**Search**

* *Full-text search*: Fast, relevant full-text search using inverted indexes, tokenization, and text analysis.

> * *Vector database*: Store and search vectorized data, and create vector embeddings with built-in and third-party natural language processing (NLP) models.

Author: ```suggestion
* *Vector database*: Store and search vectorized data, and create vector embeddings with built-in and third-party natural language processing (NLP) models.
* *Semantic search*: Understand the intent and contextual meaning behind search queries using tools like synonyms, dense vector embeddings, and learned sparse query/document expansion.
```

* *Endpoint security*: Monitor and analyze endpoint security data.
* *Threat hunting*: Search and analyze data to detect and respond to security threats.

This is just a sample of search, observability, and security use cases enabled by {es}.
Refer to our https://www.elastic.co/customers/success-stories[customer success stories] for concrete examples across a range of industries.

[discrete]
[[elasticsearch-intro-elastic-stack]]
.What is the Elastic Stack?
*******************************
{es} is the core component of the Elastic Stack, a suite of products for collecting, storing, searching, and visualizing data.
{estc-welcome-current}/stack-components.html[Learn more about the Elastic Stack].
*******************************

[[elasticsearch-intro-deploy]]
=== Run {es}

To use {es}, you need a running instance of the {es} service.
You can deploy {es} in various ways.

**Quick start option**

> * <<run-elasticsearch-locally,*Local dev*>>: Get started quickly with a minimal local Docker setup. Recommended if you like getting started in a local environment.

Author: yeah might just remove that second sentence entirely

"run local dev if you like local dev" is a bit tautological haha

> * <<run-elasticsearch-locally,*Local dev*>>: Get started quickly with a minimal local Docker setup. Recommended if you like getting started in a local environment.

Author: rewording to "Get started quickly with a minimal local Docker setup for development and testing."

**Hosted options**

* {cloud}/ec-getting-started-trial.html[*Elastic Cloud*]: {es} is available as part of our hosted Elastic Stack offering, deployed in the cloud with your provider of choice. Sign up for a https://cloud.elastic.co/registration[14-day free trial].
* {serverless-docs}/general/sign-up-trial[*Elastic Cloud Serverless* (technical preview)]: Create serverless projects for autoscaled and fully managed {es} deployments. Sign up for a https://cloud.elastic.co/serverless-registration[14-day free trial].

> **Advanced options**

Author: cool yeah agree this list is prob ok for now

{es} is the heart of the {estc-welcome-current}/stack-components.html[Elastic Stack]. 
Combined with https://www.elastic.co/kibana[{kib}], it powers the following Elastic solutions:

* https://www.elastic.co/observability[Observability]
* https://www.elastic.co/enterprise-search[Search]
* https://www.elastic.co/security[Security]

[TIP]
====
{es} has a lot of features. Explore the full list on the https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/features[product webpage^].
====

[discrete]
[[elasticsearch-intro-elastic-stack]]
.What is the Elastic Stack?
*******************************
{es} is the core component of the Elastic Stack, a suite of products for collecting, storing, searching, and visualizing data.
{estc-welcome-current}/stack-components.html[Learn more about the Elastic Stack].
*******************************

[discrete]
[[elasticsearch-intro-use-cases]]
==== Use cases

{es} is used for a wide and growing range of use cases. Here are a few examples:

**Observability**

* *Logs, metrics, and traces*: Collect, store, and analyze logs, metrics, and traces from applications, systems, and services.

> * *Application performance monitoring (APM)*: Monitor and analyze application performance data.

Author: I'll take "business critical" with one eyebrow very slightly raised

* *Real user monitoring (RUM)*: Monitor, quantify, and analyze user interactions with web applications.
* *OpenTelemetry*: Elastic has full native support for OpenTelemetry data.

**Search**

* *Full-text search*: Fast, relevant full-text search using inverted indexes, tokenization, and text analysis.
* *Vector database*: Store and search vectorized data, and create vector embeddings with built-in and third-party natural language processing (NLP) models.

> * *Semantic search*: Understand the intent and contextual meaning behind search queries using tools like synonyms, dense vector embeddings, and learned sparse query/document expansion.

Author: I'm editing your suggestion to `query-document` pair, which is the form I was looking for, [reference](https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Examples-of-Query-Document-Pairs_tbl4_381318617).

> * *Hybrid search*: Combine full-text search with vector search using state-of-the-art ranking algorithms.

Author: we have to color outside the lines of consistency a tiny bit, just because vectorDB is a keyword

> * *Search applications*: Add hybrid search capabilities to apps or websites, or build enterprise search engines over your organization's internal data sources.

Author: ```suggestion
* *Build search experiences*: Add hybrid search capabilities to apps or websites, or build enterprise search engines over your organization's internal data sources.
```

> * *Search applications*: Add hybrid search capabilities to apps or websites, or build enterprise search engines over your organization's internal data sources.

Author: definitely mean the generic thang, updating to "Build search experiences" for maximum augmented disambiguation (MAD)

> * *Retrieval augmented generation (RAG)*: Use {es} as a retrieval engine to update and augment Generative AI models.

Author: agree

> * *Retrieval augmented generation (RAG)*: Use {es} as a retrieval engine to update and augment Generative AI models.

Author: (me talking to myself here to improve this line) RAG is more than just about returning better results (R), it's also doing stuff with those results (G)

> * *Retrieval augmented generation (RAG)*: Use {es} as a retrieval engine to update and augment Generative AI models.

Author: ```suggestion
* *Retrieval augmented generation (RAG)*: Use {es} as a retrieval engine to supplement generative AI models with more relevant, up-to-date, or proprietary data for a range of use cases.
```

* An index is a collection of documents

> * An index has a unique name

Author: I like it I'll draft some additional color here

> * An index has a unique name

Author: moved to prose but now thinking maybe it is needlessly detailed at this point

> * An index has a unique name

Author: I changed my mind again in the blink of an eye

* An index can also be referred to by an <<aliases,alias>>

> * An index has a mapping that defines the schema of its documents

Author: I like poetry, but agree :)

==== Data and metadata

> An indexed document contains data and metadata.

Author: I refactored your first sentence and not sure if your second sentence adds a lot of value in an intro.

> An indexed document contains data and metadata.

Author: could maybe do a nicer job of annotating a document in hands-on API companion to provide a concrete example of what you were alluding to in "Some metadata fields dictate how the document is processed or stored."

==== Data and metadata

An indexed document contains data and metadata.
In {es}, <<mapping-fields,metadata fields>> are prefixed with an underscore.

> The most important metadata fields are:

Author: yeah agree the goal was just to say here are some basics about what an elasticsearch document looks like if you have never seen one before, but _source is not super imp  

> consider dropping the list of most important metadata fields to avoid finger on the scale

💯

and how it should be stored.
When adding documents to {es}, you have two options for mappings:

> * <<mapping-dynamic, Dynamic mapping>>: Let {es} automatically detect the data types and create the mappings for you. This is great for getting started quickly, but might yield suboptimal results for your specific use case due to automatic field type inference.

Reviewer: :2c: avoid `this is great for` due to vagueness

```suggestion
* <<mapping-dynamic, Dynamic mapping>>: Let {es} automatically detect the data types and create the mappings for you. Dynamic mapping is useful for getting started quickly, but might yield suboptimal results for your specific use case due to automatic field type inference.
```

Author: I would contend that "useful" is equally vague but we're getting into the nitty weeds

Maybe we can go from "Great to good"? Still vague but feels nicer in active voice?

* <<mapping-explicit, Explicit mapping>>: Define the mappings up front by specifying data types for each field. Recommended for production use cases, because you have full control over how your data is indexed to suit your specific use case.

[TIP]
====
You can use a combination of dynamic and explicit mapping on the same index.
This is useful when you have a mix of known and unknown fields in your data.
====

// New html page
[[es-ingestion-overview]]

> === Add data to {es}

Reviewer: the changes that you made to this page are so so valuable! I LOVE being able to understand how to get data into ES at a high level. would have been a game changer for March Shaina.

Reviewer 3: The origin of this content has been available for a couple of years, but somewhat hidden: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud/current/ec-cloud-ingest-data.html 

I've been using this starter content as the foundation of my ingest experience work, which means we'll have some duplication to sort out. We knew that there would be overlaps, so no big surprise there.  We'll figure out the best way to communicate this info to users, and do the right thing.

There are multiple ways to ingest data into {es}.

> The option that you choose depends on whether you're working with timestamped data, non-timestamped data, where the data is coming from, its complexity, and more.

Reviewer: gramma 

```suggestion
The option that you choose depends on whether you're working with timestamped data or non-timestamped data, where the data is coming from, its complexity, and more.
```

[discrete]
[[es-ingestion-overview-general-content]]
==== General content

General content is data that does not have a timestamp.

> This could be data like vector embeddings, website content, product catalogs, or more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This could be data like vector embeddings, website content, product catalogs, and more.
```

Author: "or more" 😆

For general content, you have the following options for adding data to {es} indices:

> * <<docs,API>>: Use the {es} <<docs,Document APIs>> to index documents directly, using the Dev Tools {kibana-ref}/console-kibana.html[Console], cURL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<docs,API>>: Use the {es} <<docs,Document APIs>> to index documents directly, using the Dev Tools {kibana-ref}/console-kibana.html[Console], or cURL.
```

> ** You can use https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} programming language clients] to index documents in your programming language of choice. For Python devs, check out the `elasticsearch-labs` repo for various https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-labs/tree/main/notebooks/search/python-examples[example notebooks]. 

Reviewer: why so much emphasis on python here?

Author: GenAI is a thing, plus notebooks are currently our best e2e how-tos

> ** You can use https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} programming language clients] to index documents in your programming language of choice. For Python devs, check out the `elasticsearch-labs` repo for various https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-labs/tree/main/notebooks/search/python-examples[example notebooks]. 

Reviewer: consider making the client connection to the API a little clearer. Also, I don't think they're "es programming language clients", but instead clients offered in various languages.

```suggestion
+
If you're building a website or app, then you can call Elasticsearch APIs using an https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} client] in the programming language of your choice. If you use the Python client, then check out the `elasticsearch-labs` repo for various https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-labs/tree/main/notebooks/search/python-examples[example notebooks]. 
```

> * {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} file uploader to upload and index CSV, JSON, and log files.

Reviewer: this one has a super clear use case we might point to (exploration / index setup)

Author: vomited up a draft of that

> * {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} file uploader to upload and index CSV, JSON, and log files.

Author: ```suggestion
* {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} file uploader to upload and index various file formats, including CSV, JSON, and log files. The GUI makes it easy to add data and guides you through the index setup process. 
```

> * {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#_add_sample_data[Sample data]: Load sample data sets into your {es} cluster using {kib}.

Reviewer: I wouldn't put this item inline. instead, consider putting it above the general/timestamped buckets (some of this data is timestamped). I'd also frame this as "if you just want to play around, consider using our sample data to start working with es"

Author: oh yeah good point

* {beats-ref}/beats-reference.html[Beats]: If your data source isn't supported by Elastic Agent, use Beats to collect and ship data. You install a separate Beat for each type of data to collect.
* {logstash-ref}/introduction.html[Logstash]: Logstash is an open source data collection engine with real-time pipelining capabilities that supports a wide variety of data sources. You might use this option because neither Elastic Agent nor Beats supports your data source. You can also use Logstash to persist incoming data, or if you need to send the data to multiple destinations. 
* {cloud}/ec-ingest-guides.html[Language clients]: The linked tutorials demonstrate how to use {es} programming language clients to ingest data from an application. (In these examples, {es} is running on Elastic Cloud, but the same principles apply to any {es} deployment.)

[TIP]
====
If you're interested in data ingestion pipelines for timestamped data, use the decision tree in the {cloud}/ec-cloud-ingest-data.html#ec-data-ingest-pipeline[Elastic Cloud docs] to understand your options.
====

// New html page
[[search-analyze]]

> === Search and analyze data

Author: I'm hesitant to start refactoring this again because this PR is out of control

I totally agree with the flow, but honestly I'm not sure how well any of this flows. 

> I think this page is better

This is the acceptance criteria

> === Search and analyze data

Author: All of this stuff will probably be revisited one way or another quite soon so I don't think we need to polish this excessively immediately

> === Search and analyze data

Reviewer: lgtm

[discrete]
[[search-analyze-data-esql]]
===== {esql}

<<esql,Elasticsearch Query Language ({esql})>> is a piped query language for filtering, transforming, and analyzing data.
{esql} is built on top of a new compute engine, where search, aggregation, and transformation functions are
directly executed within {es} itself.

Today, it supports a subset of the features available in Query DSL, like aggregations, filters, and transformations.
It does not yet support full-text search or semantic search.

It comes with a comprehensive set of <<esql-functions-operators,functions and operators>> for working with data and has robust integration with {kib}'s Discover, dashboards and visualizations.

Learn more in <<esql-getting-started,Getting started with {esql}>>, or try https://www.elastic.co/training/introduction-to-esql[our training course].

[discrete]
[[search-analyze-data-query-languages-table]]
==== Query languages overview

// TODO: do I belong here?

The following table summarizes all available {es} query languages, to help you choose the right one for your use case.

[cols="1,2,2,1", options="header"]
|===
| Name | Description | Use cases | API endpoint

| <<query-dsl,Query DSL>>

> | Primary query language for {es}. Powerful and flexible JSON-style language that enables complex queries.

Author: Unfortunately I read [a book about the Beaufort Scale](https://huler.weebly.com/defining-the-wind.html) and the concision of the language in that original scale has colored my entire approach to grammatical completeness in tables 😃 

[Snippet from scale](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8b5c91e6-df52-4f15-a8fa-194ce8096e60)

| Supports full-text search, semantic search, keyword search, filtering, aggregations, and more.
| <<search-search,`_search`>>

| <<esql,{esql}>>
| Introduced in *8.11*, the Elasticsearch Query Language ({esql}) is a piped query language language for filtering, transforming, and analyzing data.
| Initially tailored towards working with time series data like logs and metrics. 
Robust integration with {kib} for querying, visualizing, and analyzing data.
Does not yet support full-text search.
| <<esql-rest,`_query`>>

| <<eql,EQL>>

> | Event Query Language (EQL) is a query language for event-based time series data. Data must contain an `@timestamp` field to use EQL.

Author: I found "the" workaround

The option that you choose depends on whether you're working with timestamped data or non-timestamped data, where the data is coming from, its complexity, and more.

[TIP]
====
You can load {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#_add_sample_data[sample data] into your {es} cluster using {kib}, to get started quickly.
====

[discrete]
[[es-ingestion-overview-general-content]]
==== General content

General content is data that does not have a timestamp.
This could be data like vector embeddings, website content, product catalogs, and more.
For general content, you have the following options for adding data to {es} indices:

* <<docs,API>>: Use the {es} <<docs,Document APIs>> to index documents directly, using the Dev Tools {kibana-ref}/console-kibana.html[Console], or cURL.
+
If you're building a website or app, then you can call Elasticsearch APIs using an https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} client] in the programming language of your choice. If you use the Python client, then check out the `elasticsearch-labs` repo for various https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-labs/tree/main/notebooks/search/python-examples[example notebooks]. 

> * {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} file uploader to upload and index various file formats, including CSV, JSON, and log files. The GUI guides you through the index setup process, making it easier to prepare your data for search and exploration."

Reviewer: perhaps also useful for uploading single files, rather than ongoing processing?

Author: done

also very fast. This enables you to analyze and visualize your data in real time.
You can search documents, filter results, and perform analytics at the same time, on the same
data, in a single request.
That means aggregations are calculated in the context of the search query.

The folowing aggregation types are available:

* <<search-aggregations-metrics,Metric>>: Calculate metrics,
such as a sum or average, from field values.
* <<search-aggregations-bucket,Bucket>>: Group documents into buckets based on field values, ranges,
or other criteria.
* <<search-aggregations-pipeline,Pipeline>>: Run aggregations on the results of other aggregations.

Run aggregations by specifying the <<search-search,search API>>'s `aggs` parameter.
Learn more in <<run-an-agg,Run an aggregation>>.

[discrete]
[[search-analyze-data-esql]]
===== {esql}

<<esql,Elasticsearch Query Language ({esql})>> is a piped query language for filtering, transforming, and analyzing data.
{esql} is built on top of a new compute engine, where search, aggregation, and transformation functions are
directly executed within {es} itself.
{esql} syntax can also be used within various {kib} tools.

> The <<esql-rest,`_query` endpoint>> accepts queries written in {esql} syntax.

Reviewer: 🎉

> This is useful when you have a mix of known and unknown fields in your data.

Author: fair enough here I guess it might be "unexpected" for the naive user, so it's more of a statement about a novice user's epistemology — "which you might find unexpected" — but agree this can be tightened. I don't love _imprecise_ either. We also don't need to be exhaustive here.

I'd rather be concrete like "can lead to suboptimal mappings because certain field types might not be inferred correctly".

> re: explicit on like 150 ... it's not just about control, it's also about making your data more functional and opening up additional use cases.

ok but we link to the main mappings section for details, this is just an overview at end of the day, we don't need 100% exhaustive summaries of capabilities 

in my little head "control" is a decent encapsulation of the advantage of explicit mappings in this context but happy to reword

> This is useful when you have a mix of known and unknown fields in your data.

Author: went with 

- "This is great for getting started quickly, but can yield suboptimal results for complex data due to automatic field type inference."
- "Recommended for production use cases, because you have full control over how your data is indexed to suit your specific use case."

====

// New html page
[[es-ingestion-overview]]

> === Add data to {es}

Reviewer: I'd like to see this topic get some more content from its big brother in the cloud docs. we also don't talk about pipelines, data manip, etc. which are foundational concepts

Reviewer: I don't know the ingest story super well, but I can see understanding that this is the point at which you can enrich data to customize it to your use case is really a production-side concern (esp for search use case). I view prod concerns as scaling, security, UAC ...

this is doing a lot of heavy lifting but I do think exposing those things here aligns with the 101 ask

> There are multiple ways to ingest data into {es}, but it depends on whether you're working with time-series data or general content that doesn't have a timestamp.

Reviewer: the other doc says "timestamped data" - time series and timestamped are both very loaded terms, neither perfect. I'd probably just follow the doc we already have.

[discrete]
[[es-ingestion-overview-time-series]]

> ==== Time-series data

Reviewer: remember everyone coming to this doc is brand new - let's do a quick definition for both timestamped / general data here with a couple examples

You can use the Fleet UI in {kib} to centrally manage Elastic Agents and their policies.
* {beats-ref}/beats-reference.html[Beats]: If your data source isn't supported by Elastic Agent, use Beats to collect and ship data. You install a separate Beat for each type of data to collect.
* {logstash-ref}/introduction.html[Logstash]: Logstash is an open source data collection engine with real-time pipelining capabilities that supports a wide variety of data sources. You might use this option because neither Elastic Agent nor Beats supports your data source. You can also use Logstash to persist incoming data, or if you need to send the data to multiple destinations. 
* {cloud}/ec-ingest-guides.html[Language clients]: The linked tutorials demonstrate how to use {es} programming language clients to ingest data from an application. (In these examples, {es} is running on Elastic Cloud, but the same principles apply to any {es} deployment.)

[TIP]
====

> If you're interested in data ingestion pipelines for time-series data, use the decision tree in the {cloud}/ec-cloud-ingest-data.html#ec-data-ingest-pipeline[Elastic Cloud docs] to understand your options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're interested in data ingestion pipelines for time series data, use the decision tree in the {cloud}/ec-cloud-ingest-data.html#ec-data-ingest-pipeline[Elastic Cloud docs] to understand your options.
```

Reviewer: a general note ... I'd like to see one of these become the source of truth and the other disappear. this feels like another case of making more worse versions of content that will mess with SEO

Reviewer: coming back to this: I think that the ask for detail is mostly to solve for our bad IA. in future we will have a dedicated ingest section that can do heavier lifting, but I think detail in this area is what people can use

====

[discrete]
[[es-ingestion-overview-general-content]]
==== General content

For general content, you have the following options for adding data to {es} indices:

* <<docs,API>>: Use the {es} <<docs,Document APIs>> to index documents directly, using the Dev Tools {kibana-ref}/console-kibana.html[Console] in {kib}, cURL, or an https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} programming language client].
+
[TIP]
====

> Once you get past the very basics, you'll want to use the <<docs-bulk,Bulk API>> for efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you get past the basics, you should use the <<docs-bulk,Bulk API>> for efficiency.
```

====

> * {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} File Uploader to upload and index CSV, JSON, and log files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} file uploader to upload and index CSV, JSON, and log files.
```

* {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#_add_sample_data[Sample data]: Load sample data sets into your {es} cluster using {kib}.

> * {enterprise-search-ref}/crawler.html[Web Crawler]: Extract and index web page content into {es} documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {enterprise-search-ref}/crawler.html[Web crawler]: Extract and index web page content into {es} documents.
```

* {enterprise-search-ref}/connectors.html[Connectors]: Sync data from various third-party data sources to create searchable, read-only replicas in {es}.

// New html page
[[search-analyze]]
=== Search and analyze data

> You can use {es} as a basic document store to simply retrieve documents and their

Reviewer: preference for no "simply" ([reasoning](https://blog.knowledgeowl.com/blog/posts/dont-say-simply-jim-fisher/))

metadata.
However, the real power of {es} comes from its advanced search and analytics capabilities.

> {es} provides a simple, coherent REST API for managing your cluster and indexing

Reviewer: there's that word again

and searching your data.

> For testing purposes, you can easily submit requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For testing purposes, you can submit requests
```

directly from the command line or through the Dev Tools {kibana-ref}/console-kibana.html[Console] in {kib}.

> From your applications, you can use the
> https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} clients]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From your applications, you can use an
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} client]
```

in your programming language of choice.

> <<query-dsl, Query DSL>> is the primary query language for {es} today.
> It's a full-featured JSON-style query language that allows you to perform complex searches and aggregations.
> We'll be using the Query DSL for most of our examples.

Reviewer: couple things

1. connect the API + QL.
2. introduce the concept of query languages broadly

3. "we" / "our" is vague here
```suggestion
<<query-dsl, Query DSL>> is the primary query language for {es} today.
It's a full-featured JSON-style query language that allows you to perform complex searches and aggregations.
This documentation uses Query DSL for most query examples.
```

// TODO: link to query languages table overview when we find a good place for it

[TIP]
====
<<esql,{esql}>> is our new piped query language (and compute engine) that is initially mainly focused on time-series data like logs and metrics.

> ====

Reviewer: I'd remove this. if you must keep it, I suggest removing the brackets at all costs, and highlighting why it's not the PRIMARY. it doesn't work on xyz

Author: added "It does not yet support all the features of Query DSL, like full-text search and semantic search."

[discrete]
[[search-data]]
==== Searching and filtering data

> {es} support a wide range of search techniques including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{es} support a wide range of search techniques, including the following:
```

> * <<full-text-queries,*Full-text search*>>. Search text that has been analyzed and indexed to support full-text search based on relevance.

Reviewer: using the term in the definition is a little confusing here - consider reword?

* <<keyword,*Keyword search*>>. Search for exact matches using `keyword` fields.
* <<semantic-search-semantic-text,*Semantic search*>>. Search `semantic_text` fields using dense or sparse vector search on embeddings generated in your {es} cluster.
* <<knn-search,*Vector search*>>. Search for similar dense vectors using the kNN algorithm for embeddings generated outside of {es}.

> * <<geo-queries,*Geospatial search*>>. Search for locations and calculate spatial relationships using geospatial queries.

Reviewer: this is a better definition you could use in the use cases

Learn about the full range of queries supported by the <<query-dsl,Query DSL>>.

> You can also filter data using the Query DSL.

Reviewer: to "the" or not to "the"?

Filters enable you to include or exclude documents by retrieving documents that match specific field-level criteria.
A query that uses the `filter` parameter indicates <<filter-context,filter context>>.

{esql} also has powerful filtering capabilities.

[discrete]
[[analyze-data]]
==== Analyzing your data

{es} enables a host of use cases based on aggregations and analytics.

> These include real-world applications like:

Reviewer: links? :) pls

Author: @shainaraskas I'm unsure about this list — feels repetitious versus the main use cases overview. thoughts?

* *Log analysis*: Monitoring system performance and detecting anomalies in IT infrastructure.
* *E-commerce analytics*: Analyzing sales trends, customer behavior, and product performance.
* *Search analytics*: Tracking user search patterns and improving relevance of search results.
* *Business intelligence*: Generating real-time dashboards and reports for data-driven decision making.
* *Content recommendation*: Analyzing user interactions to provide personalized content suggestions.

[discrete]
[[analyze-data-query-dsl]]

> ===== Query DSL

Reviewer: this heading comes out of nowhere. need to connect query languages with "analyzing your data" - maybe in headings

overall, I think you should make the relationships between the QLs and these sections more consistent.

Author: > overall, I think you should make the relationships between the QLs and these sections more consistent.

💯 

maybe focus on Query DSL and ES|QL, outlining search, filtering, and analysis capabilities for each

and then appendix with table that gives honorable mention to others

* <<docs,API>>: Use the {es} <<docs,Document APIs>> to index documents directly, using the Dev Tools {kibana-ref}/console-kibana.html[Console], or cURL.
+
If you're building a website or app, then you can call Elasticsearch APIs using an https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[{es} client] in the programming language of your choice. If you use the Python client, then check out the `elasticsearch-labs` repo for various https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch-labs/tree/main/notebooks/search/python-examples[example notebooks]. 
* {kibana-ref}/connect-to-elasticsearch.html#upload-data-kibana[File upload]: Use the {kib} file uploader to index single files for one-off testing and exploration. The GUI guides you through setting up your index and field mappings.
* https://github.com/elastic/crawler[Web crawler]: Extract and index web page content into {es} documents.
* {enterprise-search-ref}/connectors.html[Connectors]: Sync data from various third-party data sources to create searchable, read-only replicas in {es}.

[discrete]
[[es-ingestion-overview-timestamped]]
==== Timestamped data

> Timestamped data in {es} refers to datasets that include a timestamp field, typically named `@timestamp` when using the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-reference.html[Elastic Common Schema (ECS)].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Timestamped data in {es} refers to datasets that include a timestamp field. If you use the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/ecs/current/ecs-reference.html[Elastic Common Schema (ECS)],  this file is named `@timestamp`.
```

This is useful when you have a mix of known and unknown fields in your data.
====

// New html page
[[es-ingestion-overview]]
=== Ingestion options

> There are multiple ways to ingest data into {es}.

Author: Done

| Initially tailored towards working with time series data like logs and metrics. 
Robust integration with {kib} for querying, visualizing, and analyzing data.
Does not yet support full-text search.
| <<esql-rest,`_query`>>

| https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/client/index.html[Programming languages]
| Client libraries and APIs for interacting with Elasticsearch using your programming language of choice. Includes Java, Python, JavaScript, Rust, and more.
| For application development. Enables data indexing, searching, updating, and aggregation directly from your application code.
| N/A

| <<eql,EQL>>
| Event Query Language (EQL) is a query language for event-based time series data. Data must contain an `@timestamp` field to use EQL.
| Designed for the threat hunting security use case.
| <<eql-apis,`_eql`>>

| <<xpack-sql,Elasticsearch SQL>>
| Allows native, real-time SQL-like querying against {es} data. JDBC and ODBC drivers are available for integration with business intelligence (BI) tools.
| Enables users familiar with SQL to query {es} data using familiar syntax for BI and reporting.
| <<sql-apis,`_sql`>>

|===

[discrete]
[[analyze-data]]
==== Analyzing your data

> {es} enables a host of use cases based on aggregations and analytics.

Author: Done

| Enables users familiar with SQL to query {es} data using familiar syntax for BI and reporting.
| <<sql-apis,`_sql`>>

| {kibana-ref}/kuery-query.html[Kibana Query Language (KQL)]

> | Kibana Query Language (KQL) is a text-based query language for filtering data that is only available in the {kib} UI.

Reviewer: `only` is probably inaccurate here because it's available through traditional es channels as well, right? 

bad edit: 

```suggestion
| Kibana Query Language (KQL) is a text-based query language for filtering data when you access it through the {kib} UI.
```
